[Rocprof-Systems]: Documentation update for profiling modes and papi counter enablement (#1437)
ROCm/rocm-systems: projects/rocprofiler-systems/docs/conceptual/data-collection-modes.rst

.. image:: ../data/fibonacci-sampling.png
   :alt: Visualization of the output of a statistical sample of the Fibonacci function

Overview of Profiling Modes
----------------------------

> ROCm Systems Profiler provides several complementary profiling approaches that can be used independently or in combination. The default mode is **tracing**. Profiling modes are controlled via the ``ROCPROFSYS_MODE`` environment variable, which determines the active backends and features.

Reviewer: Not quite true. The default mode depends on which executable that you are using. For example, for `rocprof-sys-sample` the default mode would be "sampling".

Available values for ``ROCPROFSYS_MODE``: `trace, sampling, causal, coverage`

Primary Collection Modes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 25 75

   * - **Mode**
     - **Purpose**
   * - **Trace Mode**
     - Event tracing
   * - **Profile Mode**
     - High-level summary profiles
   * - **Sampling Mode**
     - Statistical call-stack sampling
   * - **Causal Mode**
     - Performance impact analysis
   * - **Coverage Mode**
     - Code coverage analysis

Trace Mode (Default)
--------------------

> Tracing mode generates comprehensive, deterministic traces of every event and measurement during application execution. This is the default mode but can also be enabled via ``ROCPROFSYS_TRACE=true`` or with ``ROCPROFSYS_MODE``.

Reviewer: See above about "default" modes.

Additional configuration options to control the tracing behavior include:

- ``ROCPROFSYS_TRACE_DELAY`` (``--trace-wait``): Delay before starting trace collection (in seconds).
- ``ROCPROFSYS_TRACE_DURATION`` (``--trace-duration``): Duration of trace collection (in seconds).
- ``ROCPROFSYS_TRACE_PERIODS`` (``--trace-periods``): Specify multiple delay/duration periods in the format ``<DELAY>:<DURATION>``, ``<DELAY>:<DURATION>:<REPEAT>``, or ``<DELAY>:<DURATION>:<REPEAT>:<CLOCK_ID>``.
- ``ROCPROFSYS_TRACE_PERIOD_CLOCK_ID`` (``--trace-clock-id``): Clock type for timing (``realtime``, ``monotonic``, ``cputime``, etc.).

> Profiling Mode

Reviewer: "Profiling  Mode" was not one of the mode that you listed above

     - ``ROCPROFSYS_SAMPLING_REALTIME_DELAY``
     - ``ROCPROFSYS_SAMPLING_REALTIME_SIGNAL``

3. **Overflow Sampling**
   - Enabled via ``ROCPROFSYS_SAMPLING_OVERFLOW=ON`` or ``--sample-overflow`` (rocprof-sys-run). It Requires Linux ``perf`` support (``/proc/sys/kernel/perf_event_paranoid <= 2``) as described `here <https://github.com/ROCm/rocm-systems/blob/develop/projects/rocprofiler-systems/docs/how-to/configuring-runtime-options.rst#rocprofsys_papi_events>`_.
   The sampling can be controlled via:
     - ``ROCPROFSYS_SAMPLING_OVERFLOW_FREQ``
     - ``ROCPROFSYS_SAMPLING_OVERFLOW_EVENT``
     - ``ROCPROFSYS_SAMPLING_OVERFLOW_SIGNAL``
     - ``ROCPROFSYS_SAMPLING_OVERFLOW_TIDS``

4. **Process Sampling**
   - Enabled via ``ROCPROFSYS_USE_PROCESS_SAMPLING=ON`` (default ON). The sampling can be controlled via:
     - ``ROCPROFSYS_PROCESS_SAMPLING_FREQ``
     - ``ROCPROFSYS_SAMPLING_CPUS``
     - ``ROCPROFSYS_SAMPLING_GPUS``

**Note**: If sampling is enabled but no specific type is selected, CPU-time sampling is used by default.

Enabling Sampling:

1. Use ``rocprof-sys-sample`` (auto-enables sampling).
2. Set ``ROCPROFSYS_USE_SAMPLING=ON``.

> 3. Use ``-S`` or ``--sample`` with ``rocprof-sys-run``.

Reviewer: Not just with `rocprof-sys-run`, right? You can also used this with `rocprof-sys-instrument`.

> 4. Set ``ROCPROFSYS_MODE=sampling``.

Reviewer: You may want to reference the page dedicated to sampling - `projects/rocprofiler-systems/docs/how-to/sampling-call-stack.rst`.

It is also worth noting: 

> The use of ``rocprof-sys-sample`` is **recommended** over
``rocprof-sys-instrument -M sampling`` when binary instrumentation
is not necessary.

We don't want to give conflicting information

.. image:: ../data/fibonacci-sampling.png
   :alt: Visualization of the output of a statistical sample of the Fibonacci function

> Overview of Profiling Modes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Overview of profiling modes
```

----------------------------

ROCm Systems Profiler provides several complementary profiling approaches that can be used independently or in combination. Profiling modes are controlled via the ``ROCPROFSYS_MODE`` environment variable, which determines the active backends and features.

> Available values for ``ROCPROFSYS_MODE``: `trace, sampling, causal, coverage`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Available values for ``ROCPROFSYS_MODE``: `trace`, `sampling`, `causal`, and `coverage`.
```

> Primary Collection Modes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Primary collection modes
```

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 25 75

   * - **Mode**
     - **Purpose**

>    * - **Trace Mode**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   * - **Trace mode**
```

     - Event tracing

>    * - **Profile Mode**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   * - **Profile mode**
```

     - High-level summary profiles

>    * - **Sampling Mode**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   * - **Sampling mode**
```

     - Statistical call-stack sampling

>    * - **Causal Mode**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   * - **Causal mode**
```

     - Performance impact analysis

>    * - **Coverage Mode**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   * - **Coverage mode**
```

     - Code coverage analysis

> Trace Mode (Default)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Trace mode (default)
```

> --------------------

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

> Tracing mode generates comprehensive, deterministic traces of every event and measurement during application execution. This mode can be enabled via ``ROCPROFSYS_TRACE=true`` or with ``ROCPROFSYS_MODE=trace`` setting.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Tracing mode generates comprehensive, deterministic traces of every event and measurement during application execution. This mode can be enabled using ``ROCPROFSYS_TRACE=true`` or ``ROCPROFSYS_MODE=trace`` setting.
```

Additional configuration options to control the tracing behavior include:

- ``ROCPROFSYS_TRACE_DELAY`` (``--trace-wait``): Delay before starting trace collection (in seconds).
- ``ROCPROFSYS_TRACE_DURATION`` (``--trace-duration``): Duration of trace collection (in seconds).

> - ``ROCPROFSYS_TRACE_PERIODS`` (``--trace-periods``): Specify multiple delay/duration periods in the format ``<DELAY>:<DURATION>``, ``<DELAY>:<DURATION>:<REPEAT>``, or ``<DELAY>:<DURATION>:<REPEAT>:<CLOCK_ID>``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- ``ROCPROFSYS_TRACE_PERIODS`` (``--trace-periods``): Specifies multiple delay/duration periods in the format ``<DELAY>:<DURATION>``, ``<DELAY>:<DURATION>:<REPEAT>``, or ``<DELAY>:<DURATION>:<REPEAT>:<CLOCK_ID>``.
```

> - ``ROCPROFSYS_TRACE_PERIOD_CLOCK_ID`` (``--trace-clock-id``): Clock type for timing (``realtime``, ``monotonic``, ``cputime``, etc.).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- ``ROCPROFSYS_TRACE_PERIOD_CLOCK_ID`` (``--trace-clock-id``): Clock type for timing, such as ``realtime``, ``monotonic``, ``cputime``.
```

> Profile Mode

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Profile mode
```

> --------------

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

> Profile mode generates high-level summary profiles with statistical aggregations (mean, min, max, stddev). This mode  can be enable via ``ROCPROFSYS_PROFILE=true``. This mode uses the **Timemory** backend. When tracing is enabled profiling is turned off by default and vice versa. However both modes can be turned on at the same time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Profile mode generates high-level summary profiles with statistical aggregations (mean, min, max, stddev). This mode can be enabled using ``ROCPROFSYS_PROFILE=true``. This mode uses the **Timemory** backend. When tracing is enabled, profiling is turned off by default, and vice versa. However, both modes can be turned on at the same time.
```

> By default, only wall-clock timing is collected. Additional metrics can be configured via ``ROCPROFSYS_TIMEMORY_COMPONENTS`` which can enables hardware counters (via PAPI), CPU, memory, and system metrics. View available components with: ``rocprof-sys-avail --components --description``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, only wall-clock timing is collected. Additional metrics can be configured using ``ROCPROFSYS_TIMEMORY_COMPONENTS``, which enables hardware counters (via PAPI), CPU, memory, and system metrics. To view the available components, use: ``rocprof-sys-avail --components --description``.
```

Profile types:

- **Flat Profile** (``--flat-profile``): Aggregated metrics per function across all contexts.
- **Hierarchical Profile** (``--profile``): Metrics organized by call-stack context.

> **Tip**: Start with a flat profile to identify high-impact functions, then use a hierarchical profile to analyze critical paths.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. tip:: Start with a flat profile to identify high-impact functions, then use a hierarchical profile to analyze critical paths.
```

> Sampling Mode

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sampling mode
```

> -------------

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

> Sampling uses statistical call-stack sampling via periodic software interrupts per thread as described in `Sampling the call stack <https://github.com/ROCm/rocm-systems/blob/develop/projects/rocprofiler-systems/docs/how-to/sampling-call-stack.rst>`_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sampling uses statistical call-stack sampling through periodic software interrupts per thread, as described in :doc:`Sampling the call stack <../how-to/sampling-call-stack>`_.
```

> Sampling Types:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sampling types:
```

> 1. **CPU-Time Sampling** (default)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **CPU-Time sampling** (default)
```

>    - Enabled via ``ROCPROFSYS_SAMPLING_CPUTIME=ON`` or ``--cputime`` (rocprof-sys-sample), ``--sample-cputime`` (rocprof-sys-run). The sampling can be controlled via:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - Enabled using ``ROCPROFSYS_SAMPLING_CPUTIME=ON`` or ``--cputime`` (rocprof-sys-sample), ``--sample-cputime`` (rocprof-sys-run). The sampling can be controlled using:
```

     - ``ROCPROFSYS_SAMPLING_CPUTIME_FREQ``
     - ``ROCPROFSYS_SAMPLING_CPUTIME_DELAY``
     - ``ROCPROFSYS_SAMPLING_CPUTIME_SIGNAL``

> 2. **Real-Time Sampling**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. **Real-Time sampling**
```

>    - Enabled via ``ROCPROFSYS_SAMPLING_REALTIME=ON`` or ``--realtime`` (rocprof-sys-sample), ``--sample-realtime`` (rocprof-sys-run). The sampling can be controlled via:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - Enabled using ``ROCPROFSYS_SAMPLING_REALTIME=ON`` or ``--realtime`` (rocprof-sys-sample), ``--sample-realtime`` (rocprof-sys-run). The sampling can be controlled using:
```

     - ``ROCPROFSYS_SAMPLING_REALTIME_FREQ``
     - ``ROCPROFSYS_SAMPLING_REALTIME_DELAY``
     - ``ROCPROFSYS_SAMPLING_REALTIME_SIGNAL``

> 3. **Overflow Sampling**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. **Overflow sampling**
```

>    - Enabled via ``ROCPROFSYS_SAMPLING_OVERFLOW=ON`` or ``--sample-overflow`` (rocprof-sys-run). It Requires Linux ``perf`` support (``/proc/sys/kernel/perf_event_paranoid <= 2``) as described `here <https://github.com/ROCm/rocm-systems/blob/develop/projects/rocprofiler-systems/docs/how-to/configuring-runtime-options.rst#rocprofsys_papi_events>`_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - Enabled using ``ROCPROFSYS_SAMPLING_OVERFLOW=ON`` or ``--sample-overflow`` (rocprof-sys-run). It requires Linux ``perf`` support (``/proc/sys/kernel/perf_event_paranoid <= 2``) as described in :ref:`rocprof-sys_papi_events`.
```

>    The sampling can be controlled via:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   The sampling can be controlled using:
```

     - ``ROCPROFSYS_SAMPLING_OVERFLOW_FREQ``
     - ``ROCPROFSYS_SAMPLING_OVERFLOW_EVENT``
     - ``ROCPROFSYS_SAMPLING_OVERFLOW_SIGNAL``
     - ``ROCPROFSYS_SAMPLING_OVERFLOW_TIDS``

> 4. **Process Sampling**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. **Process sampling**
```

   - Enabled via ``ROCPROFSYS_USE_PROCESS_SAMPLING=ON`` (default ON). The sampling can be controlled via:
     - ``ROCPROFSYS_PROCESS_SAMPLING_FREQ``
     - ``ROCPROFSYS_SAMPLING_CPUS``
     - ``ROCPROFSYS_SAMPLING_GPUS``

> **Note**: If sampling is enabled but no specific type is selected, CPU-time sampling is used by default.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. note:: If sampling is enabled but no specific type is selected, CPU-time sampling is used by default.
```

> Enabling Sampling:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To enable sampling:
```

1. Use ``rocprof-sys-sample`` (auto-enables sampling).
2. Set ``ROCPROFSYS_USE_SAMPLING=ON``.
3. Set ``ROCPROFSYS_MODE=sampling``. 
4. Use ``-S`` or ``--sample`` with ``rocprof-sys-run``. 
5. Use ``-M sampling`` or ``--mode sampling`` with ``rocprof-sys-instrument``. 

> Use of ``rocprof-sys-sample`` is **recommended** over ``rocprof-sys-instrument -M sampling`` when binary instrumentation is not necessary. Please refer this section for more details: `Sampling the call stack <https://github.com/ROCm/rocm-systems/blob/develop/projects/rocprofiler-systems/docs/how-to/sampling-call-stack.rst?plain=1#L43>`_ .

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use of ``rocprof-sys-sample`` is **recommended** over ``rocprof-sys-instrument -M sampling`` when binary instrumentation is not necessary. For more details, see :doc:`Sampling the call stack <../how-to/sampling-call-stack>`.
```

Causal Mode

> -----------

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

> Causal profiling quantifies the potential impact of optimizations in parallel code and predicts where efforts should be focused as descibed in `Performing causal profiling <https://github.com/ROCm/rocm-systems/blob/develop/projects/rocprofiler-systems/docs/how-to/performing-causal-profiling.rst>`_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Causal profiling quantifies the potential impact of optimizations in parallel code and predicts where efforts should be focused as described in :doc:``Performing causal profiling <../how-to/performing-causal-profiling>`.
```

This mode can also be enabled via: ``ROCPROFSYS_USE_CAUSAL=true`` or ``ROCPROFSYS_MODE=causal``.

> Coverage Mode

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Coverage mode
```

-------------

Coverage mode tracks which parts of your code are executed during a run. It uses binary instrumentation to record function and/or basic block execution. This mode can be enabled via ``rocprof-sys-instrument -M coverage``.

Granularity options:

- Function-level: ``--coverage=function`` (``CODECOV_FUNCTION``)
- Basic block-level: ``--coverage=basic_block`` (``CODECOV_BASIC_BLOCK``)

> **Note**: Coverage mode disables several other features and all other modes to reduce overhead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. note:: Coverage mode disables several other features and all other modes to reduce overhead.
```
